# LABS

* Questions:
  * tom@skymind.io

-----------------
<div style="page-break-after: always;"></div>

# Lab Prep

## Introduction

In this class you will do some work in Python and some work in Java. 

For ease of downloading everything has been setup as a github repo for a java project. A virtual Machine is also available, ask your instructor

The Python code is stored in the resources folder in a folder named Python.

## Setting up Keras

## Version

Keras recently released version 2. DeepLearning4J support for Version 2 models is not yet complete. If you wish to use the model import features you must install keras version 1. 

## Dependencies

Keras uses the following dependencies:

* numpy, scipy
* yaml
* HDF5 and h5py (optional, required if you use model saving/loading functions)

When using the TensorFlow backend:

TensorFlow
See installation instructions.

https://www.tensorflow.org/install/

When using the Theano backend:

Theano
See installation instructions.
http://deeplearning.net/software/theano/install.html#install

To install Keras:

sudo pip install keras==1.2

Switching from TensorFlow to Theano

By default, Keras will use TensorFlow as its tensor manipulation library. Follow these instructions to configure the Keras backend.



1. Step One


```
git clone https://github.com/tomthetrainer/KerasWorkshop.git
```

2. Step two

Import the project into Intellij by following instructions at https://deeplearning4j.org/quickstart

3. Additional Resources

Two saved Keras Model for VGG-16 and the DL4J version are too large to put into the main github repo. I have included them on github by creating a release for the project. 

Although there is no specific Lab to load those models, there are examples in the Solution project that show loading these large useful models for image recognition. 


Get the saved models from the following url

https://github.com/tomthetrainer/KerasWorkshop/releases

vgg16.zip

vgg_combined_save.h5

The Labs expect those to be in the /tmp directory. Either place them there or modify the java code that refers to the file path. 


4. Structure of the Lab Repo.

Navigate to src/main/java/ai.skymind.training and you will find 3 projects

* demos
* labs
* solutions


## labs

You will work through the Lab detailed later in this document in the labs project. A stub file is prepared for you and the instructions will walk you through completing the code. 

## demos

Some demos are available in the demo project. These are complete code examples. 

1. ImageDemo demonstrates simple image into INDArray using NativeImageLoder
2. IrisNoImport is a working example of classification of iris flower data
3. Simplest network is a very simple network that takes a single value input and trains towards a single value output. It also shows the Web based User Interface. 
4. VGG16SparkJavaWebApp, takes network that was imported from Keras into DL4J and builds web app to run inference onuser selected image. 

## solutions

Working solutions to the labs and a few other included examples.





